[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So when I was 26, I
got a huge wake-up call.
It was stage III colon cancer.
And at that time, I was a
real estate entrepreneur.
I was just working really
hard to build a business,
acquiring rental
property, learning
how to manage properties
and run crews.
And I was just basically
going 90 miles an hour,
just a young, ambitious
guy, and also a musician.
So nights and weekends,
I was writing songs
and doing that stuff.
And so yeah, just was completely
derailed by a colon cancer
diagnosis.
I had pain in my abdomen.
And I thought,
gee, I don't know.
What's going on?
Do I have an ulcer or something?
And I just ignored it
because it wasn't that bad.
It would come and go.
Most of the time, I had no pain.
But then I would just have
these twinges everyone
once in a while, these
weird, sharp pains,
the kind where you're
like, whoa, what was that?
But over time, over the
better part of a year,
it got worse and worse.
And then eventually,
I had a colonoscopy
and they found this
golf ball-sized tumor
in my large intestine,
biopsied it sent it to the lab.
And they're like, you've
got stage II colon cancer.
This is an old person's disease.
They don't even screen for colon
cancer till you're in your 50s
and I'm 26.
So it was like,
what in the world
is happening to me right now?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
My wife and I had been married
for just over two years,
no kids.
We were just getting started,
just trying to build a life.
And yes, we were
talking about kids.
But yeah, this just completely
interrupted my entire life,
A. And B, it was like,
well, I don't even
know if I'm going to--
am I going to die young?
Am I going to have kids?
What's my future
going to look like?
Are my parents going to have
to bury their only child?
Is my wife going
to have to bury me,
that we've been together for
eight years, married for two?
So yeah, all these
emotions was swirling.
And it was a really scary time.
Well, the first thing
that happens when you're
diagnosed with cancer is fear.
It's a huge stress and
fear bomb in your life
because all the sudden--
your life's probably
pretty good or OK or whatever.
Maybe it's great.
And then all the sudden,
it's like, cancer,
which equals potential
death, maybe soon.
And if you know the way cancer
industry and treatment works,
it means suffering immediately.
So it's surgery,
chemo, and radiation.
These are all brutal therapies
that you will suffer,
and especially chemo.
And so yeah, instantly,
I'm afraid for my life.
And inside the cancer
industry, they really
use fear to motivate patients
just to say yes to treatment,
unfortunately.
It's just that the culture of
oncology is, to the patient,
if you don't do what I
say, you're going to die.
And a lot of times, the
patients are terminal anyway.
They're going to die anyway.
And the doctor is
not even telling them
that, oh, by the way, this
treatment can't cure you.
There's no way it's
going to cure you.
It doesn't cure anybody with
your type or your stage.
But you have to take it
or you're going to die.
So for me, that wasn't my story.
My story was slightly different.
I had surgery.
They took out this tumor.
And then they said, you need 9
to 12 months of chemotherapy.
And it's worse than we thought.
We thought it was stage II.
It's stage IIIC.
So it's one click from stage
IV, which means it's metastatic.
Colon cancer is the second
leading cause of cancer death
in the US and in many
industrialized Western nations.
So surgery doesn't cure it.
And your only hope is that
the chemotherapy will maybe
mop up the cancer stem
cells and circulating
tumor cells that are already
circulating in your body.
And what do you say to that?
I didn't know anything
about anything.
So I'm afraid I'm going to die.
And they're telling me that
if I don't do what they say,
then I'm definitely
going to die.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In the very beginning of
my treatment experience,
I was rushed into surgery.
So they wanted to get me
into surgery the next day.
This is how fast the
cancer industry moves.
Patients, they get a diagnosis.
It's a whirlwind, like, what?
I have cancer now?
What's going on?
Oh, and you're going to need
to be in surgery tomorrow
and we've gotta
get this out of you
right away before it
spreads and kills you.
That's what they told me.
And so it's like, we want to
get you into surgery tomorrow.
The surgeon will call you
to set up the appointment.
And I'm just like, uh, OK
like every cancer patient.
I don't even know what's
happening to me right now.
And in my case, there was a
mix-up and they didn't call.
And then when they finally
did two days later--
because this was two
days before Christmas,
when I was diagnosed.
I'm like, great, awesome
Christmas this is going to be.
And they finally called.
And I said, look,
can we wait a week?
Because I don't want to be in
the hospital over Christmas.
It's already depressing enough.
Can I at least not be in
the hospital on Christmas?
So we postponed it a week.
But still, a week is
not much time either.
A week-- so I have surgery.
They take out a third
of my large intestine.
And they take out the tumor.
And they realize that it's
spread to my lymph nodes
and it's worse than we thought.
It's stage IIIC, not stage II.
And things were looking
worse and worse.
It was just more bad news,
like, oh, now you need chemo.
You need 9 to 12
months of chemotherapy.
And the idea of chemotherapy
didn't make sense to me.
Even though I'd never had any
friends or family members go
through cancer, just
the idea of poisoning
me to get healthier, that I'm
going to poison myself back
to health or that you're going
to poison me back to health
and I'm going to get really,
really sick but then somehow,
it's going to make me better,
I couldn't make sense of it.
And I'm a very
rational, intuitive guy,
which sounds like a
contradiction, sort of.
But I couldn't rationalize it.
It just didn't make sense.
And so I had this nagging
problem with chemo.
And I was also deeply insecure.
I was a deeply insecure guy.
And so the thought
of myself being
reduced to this emaciated,
bald, yellow skin--
just a cancer patient, that
was just an awful feeling.
And so I had an
aversion to it just
from being really insecure.
I didn't want to become that.
And so I didn't know
what to do, though.
And my wife and I go home
and we pray about it.
I'm like, God, if there's
another way, just show me.
I don't know what to do.
And this just
doesn't seem right.
I'm just reaching
out, like, help.
And I get a book that comes
to me from a man in Alaska who
knew my dad.
Sends me a book that
was written by a man who
had healed his own colon cancer
with diet, radical diet change,
raw food, tons of carrot juice.
And his cancer healed.
So it wasn't a quick fix or
a magic bullet or whatever.
It was just a very deliberate,
systematic radical diet
and life change.
And I'm reading this book
and I'm like, this is it.
I asked for something
and this book came.
This is it.
I'm just going to believe this
is the answer to my prayer.
I can chalk it up or write
it off as a coincidence
or I can just choose to
believe, exercise my faith
and be like, OK.
And so that's what I did.
And I was excited about it.
I was reading this guy's story.
I was like, man,
this is amazing.
This makes so much sense to me.
And in 2004, nobody was talking
about the raw food diet.
It was weird.
That was for weirdos.
I even worked at
a Wild Oats, which
got bought out by Whole
Foods, and never heard anyone
mention a raw food diet when
I worked there in college.
So it was even weird to me.
But it made sense, because
the premise is like,
hey, let's stop eating
all this fast food
and junk food and processed
food, all this garbage and way
too much meat and
dairy, and let's
go back to this really
simple diet of food
straight from the
earth, unadulterated,
organic fruits and vegetables
in their natural state.
So I'm like, I've
never done this.
This makes sense.
And it sounds a lot
better than chemo.
So OK, I'm doing it.
I call my wife and I
was excited about it.
And she was not excited.
She grew up in a very
conventionally-minded
household.
They went to the
doctor for everything.
And she couldn't understand it.
I grew up in--
my mom was a natural health
nut kind of lady and shopped
at hole-in-the-wall
health food stores.
And we always had little, weird
supplements and food products
and stuff that my friends were
like, what is this, something
with kelp in it in 1990.
So anyway, the point is
I was comfortable with it
and it made sense.
So the next thing that happened
was I had all these family
members start to
call me and tell me
that I was making a
mistake I was like,
well, I prayed and
I got this book.
And I'm like, this is it.
I had so much clarity.
And then all the sudden,
everyone around me
is like, no, no, do not do that.
I know someone who did
alternative therapies
and they died or don't
you think if there
was something that
worked better,
the doctors would know about it?
And I'm like, I don't know
how to answer these questions.
I've only read the first
couple chapters of this book.
I don't even know.
So then all the sudden, the fear
is back, the fear, the doubt,
the anxiety.
It's all back and present.
And it was very tough
because I realized
my mom supported me,
but beyond my mom
at that time, everyone else
who loved me didn't understand.
And so they couldn't support
me because it was just such
a radical idea that
they just couldn't--
it was as weird to them
as chemo was weird to me.
And I realized I was alone.
And that was scary.
And so in order to appease
the people around me,
I agreed to go
see an oncologist.
They were saying, well,
will you please just
go meet with them, hear
what they have to say?
And I'm like, OK,
OK, OK, I'll go.
But by the way, I had
converted to a raw food diet
overnight, went out,
where can I buy a juicer?
Who sells them?
Bought the juicer, loaded up
on raw fruits of vegetables,
giant--
I realized, whoa, they sell
these 20-pound bags of organic
juicing carrots,
carrots for making--
I'm like, this is amazing.
I had no idea.
So I loaded up on this produce,
started on the raw food diet.
And then again, OK,
I'll see the oncologist.
So we go to the clinic.
And it's full of people.
They're all twice my
age, three times my age.
I was a rock and roll dude.
I was playing in
bands, writing songs.
I had shaggy hair and
a handlebar mustache.
And I was just like,
what am I doing here?
I don't even belong here.
And the TV is on.
And out comes Jack Lalanne.
Jack Lalanne is on the morning
show in the tiny, little window
of time that I'm sitting in
the oncologist's waiting room.
And he comes out and
he starts going off
about nutrition and natural
therapies and healing
and the reasons
why we're all sick
is because we're eating all this
junk food and processed food
and if man made
it, don't eat it.
And I'm like, man, I
can't believe this is--
he's on the TV right now.
There's no way this is not--
this is not a coincidence.
This cannot be a coincidence.
And I was like, can you
believe this is on right now,
to my wife.
And she's like, yeah,
it's pretty weird.
So we go back and
see the oncologist.
And he gives me this
really standard pitch.
You've got stage
III colon cancer.
You've got about a 60% chance of
living 5 years with treatment.
And I'm thinking, 60%
chance of living 5 years?
That's barely better
than a coin toss.
What if he's wrong?
What if it's worse?
So it didn't inspire
any confidence.
And I asked him about
the raw food diet.
And he said, no,
you can't do it.
It'll fight the chemo.
And I was like, that's weird.
And I never asked
him what he meant,
but it was a weird thing to say.
I found out later
that the raw food
diet is such a powerful
detoxification and cleansing
diet that when you're trying
to do raw foods and chemo,
your body kicks the
chemo out a lot faster
and it doesn't really do as
much damage, which sounds good;
but to them, they want it to
do as much damage as possible.
So they don't work together.
And they're also afraid that
any bacteria on raw food
is going to harm you
because they've destroyed
your immune system with chemo.
And so now, the
bacteria on an apple
might cause a
problem in your body.
I learned all that later.
We asked him about
alternative therapies
and he said, no, there are none.
And if you don't do
chemotherapy, you're insane.
And that moment, just
a tidal wave of fear
just smashed me, it was like,
smashed me on the rocks.
And when you're under stress--
fear is a stress emotion.
When you're under
stress, your body
responds with fight or flight.
And the fight or
flight response is
it starts pumping hormones,
adrenaline and cortisol.
And those hormones make a
lot of physiological changes
in the body.
There are these
physiological reactions
that happen in the body.
And one of them is your
brain chemistry changes.
You think very differently.
And parts of your brain
actually shut off, your ability
to think rationally and
logically, analytically,
shut off.
And the part of your
brain that lights up
is the part that's really
wired for survival.
It's fight or flight.
And that part is very
irrational and impulsive.
And so even your memory--
your memory stops recording when
you're under extreme stress,
which is why you hear
testimonies from people all
the time that when they're
in a traumatic event,
a fight or life-threatening--
and they're asked, can
you tell us what happened,
a lot of times, they're like, I
don't even know what happened.
It's like I blacked out.
Because the stress
hormones interfere
with your brain chemistry.
So I'm sitting there and I'm
in this hyper fear/anxiety
situation.
And he's belittling me and
just talking down to me
and just essentially
saying, if you
don't do what I'm telling you
to do, you're going to die.
And it's all blurry.
And something he said
just pokes through.
And he says, blah, blah, blah,
and I'm not telling you this
because I need your business.
And I was like, wait a minute.
This sounds like a sales pitch.
I was in sales and this guy's
doing the push away technique
on me right now.
It's a sales technique, like,
I don't need your business.
And then you're
like, oh, well, maybe
I should work with you, then.
And I'm thinking, man, business.
This is a business.
And this guy is actually
giving me a pitch right now.
And so even though I had
these little epiphanies
and was getting these
clues at our meeting,
the fear was so
strong and so powerful
and the anxiety
that like a robot,
I basically finished our meeting
and walked straight to the desk
and made an appointment
to start chemo,
to get a port put in in a
few weeks and start chemo.
I walked into the
oncology clinic
confident in what I was doing
and I walked out terrified.
And a lot of cancer
clinics are like that.
It's like a fear factory.
And so I made a
fear-based decision.
I'm afraid I'm
going to die, so OK.
I guess I got to do
chemo if I want to live.
And my wife and I walked to
her car and just cried, man.
We were just so
upset and scared.
And we held hands in her car.
And I just remember us
sitting there just choking
through a prayer and
just in true desperation
because my faith had
just been shattered.
My confidence was shattered.
I'd been on the raw
food diet for a week
and I was feeling good.
I really was.
But everything just got--
we used an expression
when I was in sales.
It was called blowing
up the island.
And that's basically
what it felt like.
This guy just blew up my island.
And I was like, I
don't know what to do.
And so I was fortunate
to have a few weeks
before the chemo would start.
So it wasn't like, you
got to start tomorrow.
Because they knew I still
had to recover from surgery.
I'm still had fresh scar.
So in that time, I
thought back through--
I was just praying a
lot and thinking a lot.
And I was thinking about,
why do I have cancer
and thinking about
the weird stuff
that the oncologist said to
me and the way treated me.
And I was thinking
about the book
that came to me from Alaska.
And I was thinking about Jack
Lalanne on the TV in the cancer
clinic, all these things.
And I'm trying to
piece it all together.
And I wished I--
I just so desperately wanted
an option that wasn't scary.
And I didn't have one.
On one hand, I had
the chemo train
that everybody's getting on.
It's state-of-the-art, luxury
train with the most comfortable
chairs you've ever sat on.
And everything seems
beautiful and modern.
And everyone's cheering
you on and supporting you
and they're running
races for you and stuff.
But yeah, OK, it
seems really great.
But then there's
immediate suffering.
You're going to suffer as
soon as you get on that train.
And once you get on that train,
it's really hard to get off.
And then well, what
happens-- where's it going?
At the end of the
line, am I going
to be better or worse or dead?
And so there's that option.
And then the other option
is me going into the jungle
alone, just hacking my way
through the jungle, no help,
in the dark.
And that option was scary.
I had two scary options.
And so fear was a big factor--
fear factor.
And I just wished one of
them was easy and exciting.
And I think that's
what we all want, like,
what's the easy path?
And neither of them were easy.
But I knew that the
jungle path that I
had to hack my way
through alone was the path
that God had shown me.
I asked for another way.
And he's like, OK,
here's another way
if you want to take it.
And that was a
moment for me that
was a really critical faith
moment, where I realized,
I have to choose.
I don't want to choose.
I wish someone
would just tell me
what to do and choose for me.
That's what most
cancer patients do.
They just give all of their
authority to the doctor
and just say, just
tell me what to do,
and you just choose for me.
And they've abdicated all
of their responsibilities
to someone who probably won't
remember their name if they
saw them in the grocery store.
And then there was the
full responsibility,
it all depends on me road.
And if I screw up, if I
do this wrong and I die,
I look like a fool and I
become the cautionary tale.
And that was scary.
And so it was like, OK, this
is the test of my faith right
here.
If I step into this path--
God, if you gave
me this path, I'm
just going to have to trust
you to see me through it
because I can't even see
two feet in front of me.
I don't know what
is even in there.
I don't know where
this is going at all.
But I had to take it.
The chemo appointment shows up.
The day arrives.
And every day
approaching that day, I
got more and more
stressed and nervous
and like, what am I going to do?
And finally, the day arrives.
And I was just
like, I can't do it.
I just could not
see myself doing it.
So I didn't go, just no-show.
And then they badgered me
and called my house and left
messages on my answering machine
and sent me a certified letter.
They were really trying
to get me into treatment,
and eventually left me alone
so I could just be free.
And then once-- I
realized that every time I
would hear from them,
fear would enter my life.
And the farther away I got
from the cancer industry,
the more confident I got
and the less fear I had
and the more of an
adventure it became.
And to most cancer
patients, they
don't look at it as
an adventure at all.
They look at the cancer
experience as just suffering.
It's just adversity and
obstacles and just struggle.
But because I made
this different choice,
yeah it was an adversity and
there was some mental struggle.
But physically, I didn't suffer
like a chemo patient suffers.
I was feeling really good
from raw food diet and juicing
and all the stuff I was doing.
And I was trying to rebuild my
body instead of tear it down.
I was trying to support
my body's ability
to heal and not hurt it.
Your immune system is
critical to health.
And if you destroy
your immune system,
you're just a sitting duck.
And chemo destroys
your immune system.
As I started to read and
research more about chemo,
I was like, oh, man, it's
worse than I thought.
And so I just started to look at
it like, this is an adventure.
I need to enjoy the process.
I don't know what's coming next.
I just need to enjoy every day.
And every time fear
would creep in,
I would have to
immediately catch it,
catch myself in
those fear moments.
Because with cancer, every
single day, you're wondering,
am I getting better or
worse, every day you wake up.
It's like the opposite
of a nightmare.
You know when you
have a nightmare and--
have you ever had a
nightmare where maybe you
lost your wallet or
something important to you
and then you wake
up you're like,
oh, oh, it was just
a dream, I still
have my wallet, or
whatever, or something?
Cancer's the opposite.
You're asleep.
You're dreaming.
Everything's good.
You're waking up and you're
feeling good and happy.
And then you remember
you have cancer.
And then the nightmare starts.
It's that nightmare
feeling every morning
when you wake up to your reality
that is basically a nightmare.
And so every day, you have
this struggle with fear.
Is it coming back?
Am I getting better or worse?
What's happening?
Am I going to live?
How much time do I have left?
What do I need to be doing
right now with my life, all
these questions.
And nobody's asking themselves.
They're just going about
their little, happy lives,
punching the clock and driving
their little car around
and having fun
with their friends
and having drinks like
everybody else in the world.
And I'm so jealous of them.
Because everybody's just
so happy and oblivious
and I'm struggling
with this every day.
But I realized that
I had to get control
of my thoughts and my
emotions, that I couldn't
let my emotions rule me and I
couldn't let fear take over.
And so as fear would creep
in, I would just catch it.
I would catch myself in
the feeling, in the fear,
and give it to God.
I would just be like,
OK, you're in control.
I trust you.
I'm just giving you my fear.
I'm letting it go.
I'm not going to be afraid.
So I was choosing.
I was making this mental choice.
Because there is a difference
between your thoughts
and your emotions.
And your thoughts can
influence your emotions.
But a lot of times, we just
let our emotions influence
our thoughts, but
they don't have to.
So I had to train myself--
and these are not
things I just made up,
just reading other
people that had healed,
healers and survivors and--
I was just learning about how
powerful our thoughts are.
And I had learned things
from success authors
and being in sales.
So some of these concepts
were already there.
And so I just realized I had to
catch these fearful thoughts,
give them to God, and make
a choice not to be afraid
and not to worry, not to worry
about the things you can't
control, like, I'm just going
to focus on what I can control.
I can take care of myself.
I can eat this
hardcore raw food, tons
of fruits and vegetables diet,
15 to 20 servings of fruits
and vegetables every day--
it was hardcore-- plus juicing.
And that much I can do.
And I can do supplements and
I can do some other therapies.
That much I can do.
The rest, I just
can't worry about.
I just can't worry
about tomorrow.
I have to enjoy today, now.
And once I started to think
that way and retrain my brain,
I started practicing
gratitude, I found this--
it was like this--
it was like an
undiscovered level of bliss
that I could switch on.
And it was like-- man,
it was like a drug.
It was like the high on
life, like, I'm high on life.
That, to me, I always
thought was dumb.
And then all the sudden,
I was feeling it.
I was feeling the
high on life feeling.
And it wasn't all
day, every day.
But I would get these surges of
just having so much gratitude
just to be able to get in
my car and go to the store
and get some stuff,
just to be on my feet.
I'd been laid up and
recovering from surgery.
So that reset my
perspective on just like,
oh, it sure is nice to be
able to jog again or walk
because I couldn't do
that for a little while.
And so yeah, I had this
really intense bliss
that I was cultivating
through gratitude and then
through taking every
thought captive, which
is a biblical concept,
controlling your thoughts
and catching yourself when
you're being judgmental
or being envious or
criticizing others,
criticizing yourself, letting
bitterness and resentment
fester toward people
that have hurt you
and wronged you in some way.
I realized I had a lot
of negative thoughts.
I was just a negative person.
I just realized,
man, I'm a mess.
I'm a mental/emotional mess.
I don't know how I got this way.
But over time, I just
became more and more
insecure, at the same time,
prideful and judgmental and
critical and just
awful on the inside.
Although I was trying
to be a good person,
I was just awful not
to people physically,
but just all these swirling
negativity and stuff.
And so I was looking in
the mirror and saying,
OK, I have to deal
with this stuff.
I can't continue
living this way.
Maybe this is why
I'm sick, because I
have so much negativity
swirling around in my mind
and that's translating into my
body and it's suppressing me
and it's making me sick.
Well, later, I learn that
those same stress hormones
that happen when you're
in fight or flight
mode, adrenaline and cortisol,
when those stress hormones are
pumping, they suppress
your immune system
and they promote inflammation.
And so a lot of people,
many, many people--
I've talked to hundreds of
cancer patients over the years.
Every single one
of them tells you--
if you ask, why do you
think you have cancer,
they always say stress.
They know that stress was a
big part of their problem.
But when you have
all this stress,
whether it's unforgiveness
or bitterness or relationship
problems or negative
thinking and envy, jealousy,
all this stuff,
you are in a state
of chronic low-level
stress, which
is a state of chronic
immunosuppression
and inflammation.
And I was like, man, this is
making so much sense to me.
I've got to change this
as fast as possible
if I want to get well.
And so I was willing to change.
That's really the bottom line.
I was willing to change
everything, break
all my bad habits and break
all my bad thought habits,
which are the hardest to break.
Physical habits aren't as hard
as your bad thinking patterns
and habits.
But if you break
those, it's very easy
to break the physical habits.
So I just got busy doing it.
To me, at that time,
it was life or death.
It wasn't like, oh, I
should probably eat better.
It's like, everybody I know
knows I'm not doing chemo
and thinks I'm crazy.
And I don't want to die a fool.
So I better be willing
to pull out all the stops
and just go hardcore.
I'm kidding myself
if I think I'm just
going to take a few herbs or
something and cure my cancer.
So I've got to do
everything I can possibly
do at the most extreme
level that I can handle.
Heroic doses of
fruits and vegetables,
essentially, is
what I was doing.
And as I analyzed and
read and researched,
I just thought, well, it ain't
chemo, so I'll take as much
of it as I can stand,
whether it's garlic or ginger
or cayenne pepper or whatever.
So that was the adventure part
happening at the same time me,
having an adventure mindset and
trying to focus on gratitude.
Because gratitude is
the secret to happiness.
It really is the secret.
The secret to
unhappiness is when
you focus on the
things you don't have,
the things that
you wish you had,
other people have.
When you focus on people
that have more than you,
it fosters envy and
jealousy and unhappiness.
But when you focus on people
that have less than you,
it fosters gratitude
and thankfulness.
Because you realize,
wow, I'm so blessed.
I have so much.
I don't live in a tin
hut in the Philippines.
I'm so blessed to be born
in the United States,
in a Western nation
that has clean drinking
water and electricity
and food everywhere.
And I have a family that loves
me and a wife that loves me.
So when I start
counting my blessings--
and then all the
sudden, it's like,
wow, man, I don't
even know what I
was upset about a minute ago
because my life is really
so good.
Yeah, the cancer
thing is a challenge.
But I have so much to
be thankful for that all
the sudden, it just puts
it all in perspective.
And so gratitude plus
actively taking my thoughts
and being-- mindfulness
is what they call it now.
Back then, I'd never
heard that term.
But catching myself thinking
negatively and changing
the way I thought,
plus gratitude,
is the way I dealt with fear.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I've thought a lot about
the stress connection
to cancer and the
mental-emotional-spiritual
connection to your
physical body.
And I can make a
pretty strong case
that stress is the root cause
of most chronic disease.
And this is why.
Because when you are
stressed, whether you're
in a state of chronic
worry and anxiety or fear
or resentment or bitterness or
unforgiveness, jealousy envy,
if you're entertaining
those emotions every day,
multiple, all of
them, some of them,
whatever, then you stay in
a state of chronic stress.
And chronic stress
promotes inflammation
and it suppresses your
immunity physiologically.
And so you create an environment
in which cancer can thrive.
And it doesn't happen overnight.
It's not like, oh I
got in a car wreck
and it was really stressful,
like, oh, no, I got cancer.
It's not like that.
It's people that are living in
this state of chronic stress
for years, usually, could
be even a decade of a really
difficult marriage, an abusive
relationship, an abusive work
environment.
They go through a
really bad lawsuit.
They lose their business.
They have a death in the
family or multiple deaths
in the family or
loved ones or friends.
And I hear these stories
over and over and over
from cancer patients when I
talk to them about their life.
I'm not a doctor.
I'm just a friend.
And so I get into
people's lives and I just
want to know, like,
tell me about your life.
What was going on?
And every time,
they always start
telling me, well, I had
this really, really, really
terrible job.
I changed jobs and it was really
awful or went through a divorce
or I lost my spouse,
lost my business.
So that leads them--
it's like this.
They're teetering on the
brink of disease for years.
And then oftentimes,
there's one traumatic event
that pushes them over the edge.
So they've got chronic
stress for years.
And then bam, someone important
to them dies or their career is
over for some reason or they
lose their home, bankruptcy.
And that's what we call the
stress trigger or the cancer
trigger.
It's just the straw that
broke the camel's back.
And then within a few
months or a year--
you can usually trace
it back just a few years
to a very traumatic
event in someone's life.
And then a few years later,
a year or two, they've
got a noticeable size tumor.
They find a tumor somewhere.
And so you can make this
case, and I do make the case,
that stress is the root cause
of almost all chronic disease.
Because prolonged stress keeps
us in a vulnerable state.
And if you're in a vulnerable,
weak state long enough,
your body becomes a place
where cancer can thrive.
If you've got a person
that's been in chronic stress
for years and they develop
cancer, well, guess what.
The cancer diagnosis itself is
a traumatic, stressful event.
And cancer patients can get
PTSD just from the diagnosis.
It's that stressful.
It's that traumatic.
It's that powerful.
They have symptoms
of PTSD because it's
such a scary just
bomb in their life.
And guess what happens.
Well, all that stress has been
contributing to their disease.
Now they get a stress bomb.
And their immune
system goes even lower
and they become even weaker.
And it's not uncommon to see--
doctors will often
tell a patient, well,
cancer grows very
slowly typically.
And this has
probably been growing
for many years in your body
and now, it's just finally
big enough for us to find it.
But then as soon as
they're diagnosed,
it starts growing very fast
and metastasizes quickly.
What happened?
It was growing slowly.
And now it's
growing really fast.
It's the traumatic stress
response in the body.
It's even more
immunosuppression, even more
worry and fear and anxiety
that is weakening them further.
And that's scary.
And it's something that
no one is talking about.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I did a lot of stuff
to address stress.
The main things I did--
there's two areas you
have to address in stress.
One is your thoughts
and emotions
and the other is
your physical body.
And so as far as
thoughts and emotions go,
yeah, I had to identify
all my stressful attitudes
and thoughts and
emotions and really
work hard to change the way I
thought, to change who I was.
I think a lot of times, we think
we can't change who we are.
And we can because
we are our decisions.
That's who we are.
The decisions we make create
our life and create our person,
the way we talk to people,
the way we treat people,
whether we're late
or early to work,
whether we work
hard or we're lazy,
if we cut corners
or if we don't.
So all of our decisions
create our reality.
So I was starting to figure that
out, that my choices mattered.
But then on the other side
of it, I was like, OK, well,
yeah, my choices
matter and now I've
got to change the way I think
and the way I deal with stress.
But then also, are there
ways I can de-stress?
Are there physical practices
that I can employ to de-stress?
Well, one of the best
antidepressants and anti-stress
activities is exercise.
Not extreme exercise,
because that
can have the opposite effect--
it can actually tax
the body too much--
but just walking,
jogging, tennis.
Any sporting activity
gets your blood pumping,
moves your lymphatic system,
releases certain chemicals
in the body that are mood
enhancers in your brain
that make you feel happy
and content and satisfied
and reduce your stress
and reduce inflammation.
So I realized, I need
to exercise every day.
I need to move my body every
day even if it's just walking
or light jogging or bouncing on
a rebounder or mini trampoline.
So I was doing that.
I learned about deep
breathing, nothing super
advanced, but even just
10 deep breaths, 10 deep--
breathe it in, hold it
for 5 seconds, let it out.
And I realized, wow, OK,
I'm oxygenated my blood.
I need to do this--
get out in the sunshine,
connect with the earth,
take my shoes off.
And so yeah, I got real
hippified, just really--
and I was really trying to
get in harmony with nature.
I was really thinking about
living as close to the earth as
possible and living as close
to in harmony with nature
as possible without becoming
a hermit in the hills.
I wasn't going to leave my
wife and move into the forest,
into a tree house yet.
But it was plan B, like,
if this doesn't work,
I could always move out
in the middle of nowhere
and live off the land and do a
40-day water fast or something.
But I was very
conscious of eliminating
anything that was
modern that was
in disharmony with the earth.
Because as our
culture has evolved,
as civilization
has evolved, we've
gotten away from
living naturally.
We use artificial light.
We use electricity.
We stay up way later
than we should.
We're not getting as much
sleep as our ancestors
because we stay up late.
So even my sleep habits changed.
I realized, I need
to go to bed early.
I need to go to bed much closer
to when the sun goes down.
And the seasons obviously
change throughout the year
and the amount of
daylight we have changes
throughout the year.
And so parts of the year,
you have a lot of daylight
and you don't need
as much sleep.
But then other
parts of the year,
the winter, at
least in the US, you
have a lot less
daylight and more night.
Maybe we need more
sleep in the winter.
So I was thinking
about these things
and really made changes
in my life that way,
too, to, again, just try to
live in harmony with the earth,
with nature, eating
food from the earth,
just trying to
figure it all out.
And it all helped.
All of those--
We know now just from
science that lack of sleep
is a major stress
promoter in the body.
Lack of sleep, you end up
with elevated stress hormones,
adrenaline and cortisol, which
suppress your immune system
and promote inflammation.
Sleep is critical.
So we know that I'm getting--
a lot of people need--
it's just common-- you hear all
the time-- people say, oh, you
need six to eight hours
of sleep every night.
Some people need way
more than that, 8 to 10.
And I'm more in
the 8 to 10 range.
And it's fine.
I'm fine with it.
It's unfortunate that
we live in a culture
where people are so
obsessed with success
and achievement that they--
I'm constantly reading
articles about life hacking
or hacking the human body,
biohacking, where, how
can I function at peak
performance 23 hours a day
and only function
on 1 hour's sleep?
Maybe I need to drink
this special coffee
concoction and or whatever.
So I'm totally not
into that at all.
I don't want to
biohack anything.
I just want to live naturally
in tune with the earth
and be healthy.
And if I need 8 to 10
hours of sleep, so be it.
I also set limits on
my workday beyond that.
I realized being a
workaholic is not healthy.
And so I started really
cutting my workday down
and spending time with my
family and with my wife.
And guess what happens
when you spend time
with people you love.
Your stress goes down.
And so yeah, there's so much
we can do to reduce stress.
And when you start
identifying all of the things
that we're doing
in modern society
or just what our daily
routines look like,
so much of our daily
routine is stress-promoting.
But there's so many easy
changes you can make,
getting more sleep,
exercising, eating
a diet that's rich in fruits
and vegetables from the earth,
plant-based diet, not
eating much meat and dairy
and processed food
and junk food,
spending time with your loved
ones, breathing fresh air,
getting sunshine,
connecting with the earth.
All these things are not hard.
Most of them don't
cost anything.
And they have such a deeply
profound and measurable effect
on the human body
and on our stress.
So it was just like I was on
an adventure, this healing
adventure.
And it was a systematic
process of discovery,
of trying to figure
out, what all can
I possibly change to help
me get well and stay well
and to help my immune system
deal with the existing cancer
cells that are circulating
in my body, that
are looking for a new place
to set up camp and start
reproducing?
And I did it.
I did it.
I just changed up my whole life.
I did everything I could find
and afford, made no excuses,
took full responsibility
for my health,
and trusted God to
lead me in the process.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
About three months
after I was diagnosed,
I had decided I
wasn't doing chemo.
I'd decided I was
determined to live.
That's really important, too.
Because I asked myself--
someone challenged me and said,
do you really want to live?
And I was like, I don't know.
I've never asked myself
that question before.
And I don't know if I do.
And I'm kind of scared,
what if I don't?
I was scared to ask
myself that question.
And it was one of those--
this woman asked me-- this is
a natural health practitioner.
She asked me the question.
And then it was almost
like time froze.
And I was in my head.
And I felt this fear of, like,
what if I secretly want to die?
And I realized that
my insecurities
and not loving myself and
really secretly hating myself--
that maybe my body was dying and
the cancer was a part of that.
Because maybe I secretly
didn't want to live.
But then I also had this
amazing epiphany, just in that--
you know how your
brain is firing, it's--
who knows how fast?
Your brain is like a computer
and all these thoughts,
[INAUDIBLE].
But then I realized,
wait a minute.
I have a choice.
I can choose to live.
And so I made the choice and
I said yes, I want to live.
I just-- OK, this
is just a choice.
It's a choice I can make.
My fate is not predetermined.
I'm going to make
this choice to live.
And so because I made
that choice to live,
then it made me start
thinking about the future.
OK, I'm going to live.
And I started making
plans for the future.
And so I thought, well what do
I want experience from life?
Well, I want to be a dad.
I want to know what
it's like to be a dad.
I'm 26.
I wasn't planning on
being a dad this soon.
But I also don't know how
much time I have to live.
And I wasn't certain I
was going to beat cancer.
But I wanted to start a family.
And so my wife and I had this
conversation just a few months
after I was diagnosed.
And we're talking about
maybe having kids and stuff.
And it was a delicate subject.
And I don't remember what I
said to her, but we talked.
And I said something
like, I don't know;
I want to start a family.
And she did, too.
And she was, I feel like,
braver than me, saying yes
to have my child not
knowing if I was going to be
there to help her raise it.
And so we did the things
that people do when
they're trying to have a baby.
And she got pregnant right away.
And so one year after
I was diagnosed,
basically, we had
our first child.
And so I had even
more reason to live.
And I had this new infusion
of joy and purpose in my life.
And I think that was a big part.
I really think it
helped me in some way,
maybe a huge way,
maybe a small way.
I don't know.
But just the fact that I was
bringing a baby into the world
and it was something that
I needed to take care of
and my wife needed take care
of and I needed to be there
for, I needed to
live for, it was just
another reason to live.
And so it's just amazing
to me that my wife
was willing to do that, that
she loved me so much that she
was willing to have my kid.
We had a beautiful baby
girl, healthy girl.
She's 11 now and she's just a
total tween, man, total tween.
But yeah, my wife
loved me so much
that she was willing
to take that huge risk.
And then we had another girl
about 3 and 1/2 years later.
And so now, I have two girls.
They're 8 and 11.
And so yeah.
It's crazy to think about.
And it's funny
because we have two--
I'm not going to throw
anyone under the bus here,
but there's my mom and her mom.
And one of the moms was very
excited when we told them.
And the other mom was not.
The other mom was
like, well, don't you
think you probably should wait
till you're out of the woods?
And it was a little
bit like, really?
Thanks a lot for that.
But when is out of the woods?
Was that five years from now?
What if I'm dead?
When is a good time to do this?
But it was too late.
She was pregnant,
so that's fine.
It's like, we're
having this baby.
But I'm just so glad I did.
If I had done
chemotherapy, it was very
likely I would've been sterile.
It's also very likely
I'd be dead today.
Because I've seen so many people
suffer and die after chemo when
they were made all
these promises that,
oh, you'll live longer or
we can beat this with chemo,
and this kind of thing.
I had a person very
close to me that
was diagnosed with the same
cancer I had, years after me.
It was stage IV.
And they told him, if
you do chemotherapy,
you'll probably live
one to two years.
If you don't do
chemotherapy, you're
going to die in six months.
And so if a doctor tells you one
to two years versus six months,
what are you going to pick?
And he didn't ask
me for any advice.
And he went with
the chemotherapy.
And he was dead in three
months, three months, man.
So I hear those kind of stories
all the time, all the time.
Patients are given this, chemo
will give you so much more life
and if you do nothing,
you're just a goner.
And then it never
works out that way.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I talk to a lot of
cancer patients.
I've talked to hundreds
of cancer patients.
And the first
questions that I always
ask them to try to help them
understand their situation
and get clarity on
their life and for me
to understand what they're going
through and where they are is--
the first question is, why
do you think you have cancer?
And one of the answers
to that is always stress.
The second question is, do
you really want to live?
And it's interesting.
Some cancer patients, a small
percentage, it might be 10%,
don't want to live.
They're ready to die.
And it's OK.
Maybe they've had a long
life and they're older
and they're satisfied
with their life
and they're just OK with it.
There was a very
famous woman that--
I believe her name is Norma.
And she was in her 90s.
She got a terminal
cancer diagnosis.
And she refused all treatment
and went on this big road trip
around the US.
And it was-- "Driving
Miss Norma," I think,
was the Facebook page.
And they made this
Facebook page,
and posting pictures of her at
the Grand Canyon and skydiving,
all kinds of stuff, just having
all these adventures as she's
93 years old, I think--
maybe 91, but whatever--
and made this choice.
She was ready to
die and she wanted
to enjoy the rest of her life.
And it was fine.
Some cancer patients are
ready to die because they've
had a very difficult life
and cancer is a way out
if you just had a hard life.
And they're really deeply
depressed and discouraged
and unhappy.
And again, it's OK.
So you got maybe 10%
of cancer patients,
this is just my
rough estimation,
that are ready to die.
And then you've got the
rest that want to live.
Most of them, even if
they're ready to die,
it's very few of them that
will admit they are but you
can tell by their actions.
But the ones that want to
live, I have to ask them why.
So do you want to live?
Yes.
Why?
What do you have to live for?
And so I make them
think about it.
I want them to think
about what they have
to live for and figure it out.
And oh, well, I have two
kids that are in high school
or I want to see my
grandkids graduate
from college or whatever.
And so having that strong
not only will to live,
but something to live
for is really important.
And that's why you see with
older people, even sometimes
just middle age and
older, is they run out
of things to live for.
They've raised their kids.
Maybe they're not really in
touch with their grandkids
and maybe they're not
that close to them.
And maybe they're retired
or close to retirement.
And they feel like they've
lost their life's purpose.
They're just
drifting through life
not really making a
difference in the world
or in anyone's life around them.
And yeah, they just
don't have a will
to live because they
lost their purpose,
or maybe never found it.
And so what I try to do
is help people find that,
help them figure out what
they have to live for.
And once you do--
like for me, I had three--
well, in the beginning, I had
two major motivators for me.
The first was the thought
of my wife burying me.
We've been together for
eight years, married for two.
And I just couldn't
bear the thought of it.
And then equally
as hard to bear was
the thought of my parents
burying their only child.
That was such a painful thought,
just to even just put myself
in their shoes or empathize
or whatever and just
think about what it'd
be like to bury me.
Not that I'm super special,
but I mean a lot to them.
I'm their whole world.
They're my parents.
I'm their only kid.
And I'm pretty much
my wife's whole world.
And so right in the
beginning, those
are my two strong motivators.
The third, to a
lesser degree, was
I wanted to experience life.
I wanted to have successes.
I wanted to have kids.
I was 26.
I still felt like a teenager.
I'm like, I'm just
getting started here.
I want more out
of life than what
I've gotten so
far, which is like,
I've barely made any money.
I barely got to do anything
really cool or fun.
Obviously, I had made some
good memories, of course,
like anybody in their 20s.
But yeah, I felt
like, wow, there's
so much I want to
do with my life
and figure out and learn
and explore and whatever.
But I was also afraid to
make plans for the future.
I was afraid to because I don't
know if I was going to die
or not.
And so that fear
of, I don't know;
I don't want to think too
far ahead because what if I
can't get there--
but I realized that making
plans for the future
was one of the best things I
could do because it got me out
of now.
It got me out of my
present problems.
And it got me thinking
through them and past them.
And it got me in
this I don't know,
success mindset or something.
Someone else could probably
explain it better than me.
But once my wife and
I decided to have kids
and she got pregnant, then it's
like, OK, now I have a future.
Now I have another thing
on my reasons to live
and things I need to live for.
And so we can
actually create things
to live for when
previously, we had none.
So if you're looking for
something to life for,
just go get somebody pregnant.
[LAUGHS]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Oh, man.
I've never done that.
That's an amazing thought.
It's amazing--
thinking about this now
makes me want to thank them
and help them understand
how they helped me survive.
And they're still pretty young.
They know their
dad's the cancer guy
and they know I'm
famous on the internet.
But we haven't had really
deep conversations about life
and cancer and what I was
going through mentally
and emotionally back
then because feel
like it's a little heavy
for them at this age.
But maybe we'll talk
about that soon.
One of the speakers
at this conference,
and I don't remember
who it was, reminded me
of this quote I've heard before.
But it was that your children--
I'm paraphrasing, but it's like,
your children basically teach
you what's wrong with you.
Yeah.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
As I was reading and learning
and trying to figure out
how I could help
myself more, I stumbled
across visualization and
affirmations and some of it,
again, I knew because I had read
successful people books, being
in sales and being
an entrepreneur,
but had never really
practiced those things.
Because I always
thought, I don't know.
They seem hokey and it's
a little bit embarrassing
to picture myself in front of
a mirror like Stuart Smalley
on "Saturday Night Live."
But I was like,
I don't care now.
I'll do anything.
There's nothing that
I am above if it's
going to help me get well.
And it started to make
more sense to me, too.
And I realized that our thoughts
have power and so do our words.
And so I started speaking
life into my body.
I started speaking like,
I'm healed, I'm healthy,
and I'm well, over
and over again.
I would just speak it out loud.
And I would think it
throughout the day.
Your thoughts
create your reality.
And the Bible says as a
man thinketh, so he is.
This is a super
famous piece of wisdom
that has been repeated ad
nauseam in the success world.
"As a Man Thinketh"
is a very famous book.
But it's straight
out of Proverbs.
And so I'm like, as a
man thinks, so he is.
So I'm like, I'm going to
start thinking, I am healed,
I'm healthy, I'm well.
And I just-- over
and over and over.
So that was a big--
just like, I'm
healed, I'm healthy,
I'm well, over and over.
And then I didn't really
get into deep visualization,
but I would think about myself
in the future periodically.
It wasn't a daily
discipline, but just I
would try to think about
myself in the future as a dad
and as a granddad and
visualizing myself
as a grandfather.
And that was part of, again,
making plans for the future.
And so whether making
plans and visualization--
they're interconnected.
And I feel like it was helpful.
I know the affirmations
were helpful.
They help me now.
I do stupid stuff like, I'm
worthy, I'm smart, I'm capable.
I have to talk to
myself sometimes.
Because that doubt creeps
in when you're doing stuff.
When you're a speaker
and you're around a lot
of successful people, you tend
to have imposter syndrome where
you feel like, I
don't belong here,
these people are all way
better than me, or something.
And so someone smarter
than me told me, man, you
got to tell yourself, no,
you deserve to be here.
You know you are worthy.
You do belong.
This is your time.
And so yeah.
So I do some of that kind of--
I don't look in the
mirror and do it,
but I just talk to
myself sometimes.
And sometimes it's out loud and
sometimes it's just in my head,
just thinking those thoughts.
But it's amazing how
quickly my attitude will--
it will literally
change my attitude
and my emotions just
instantaneously,
when I just make--
no, like-- I start to
feel anxious or worried.
What if I can't do it?
And I'll just be
like, no, I'm smart.
I'm capable.
I can do this.
I can figure this out.
And then all the sudden, I
have a boost of confidence.
It's amazing.
It's so dumb, but it works.
It's so simple.
And the beautiful thing
is truth is simple.
It is.
Lies are complicated.
And the simplest things
that people scoff at
are some of the most
powerful things we can do.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I've thought a lot
about the question
of, how do you
define success, which
ties into also
fulfillment, and probably
because Tim Ferriss asks every
person on his podcast, who's
the most successful person
you know, or something.
And my answer to that would
be different than most.
Because it's not like, oh,
Steve Jobs or something.
To me, success is
leading a fulfilled life.
And the way you define
a fulfilled life
is different for every person.
But what I believe is
that you're not going
to get fulfillment from stuff.
You don't get
fulfillment from money.
You don't get it from fame.
You don't get it from business
accolades and recognition.
You don't get it from
material possessions.
But the way the world measures
success, it's all those things.
All those things equal success.
But we have thousands
and thousands
of successful people with really
serious personal problems.
Look at how many
people in Hollywood
are rich and successful,
and yet they're
drug and alcohol addicts.
Their family lives are terrible.
They just go through one bad
relationship after another.
And so I was in a success
mindset and trap early on.
And cancer totally
reset my perspective.
It gave me this
profound appreciation
for the littlest things.
And so I just started
to realize how much I
had to be grateful
for and thankful for.
And I started comparing myself
to people that had nothing
and realizing, I have so much.
I'm rich.
I am a rich man, to be born in
the United States of America.
I'm born rich.
Some of the poorest
people in the US
have houses, cars,
smartphones, cable television,
and an unlimited supply of food.
That's what we call
poor in the US.
And that is rich to
people in Nicaragua,
in Cambodia in
most of China, that
don't have any of those things.
They don't have TV, smartphones,
cars, and their houses are--
we wouldn't even
call it a house.
We'd call it just a shack or a
shanty or whatever, a lean-to.
And I just realized
that I'm so blessed,
to the point of being spoiled.
And most of us in Western
countries, we're just spoiled.
And the more you have,
the more you want.
And you can never be
fulfilled by stuff.
And it's easy to
fall in the trap
of wanting more stuff,
more money, more whatever.
And sure, there is a
certain amount of money
that can afford you to
do things like travel
and live in a safe
neighborhood versus
a dangerous neighborhood.
And so I'm not against money.
I'm glad I was able to move my
family into a safe neighborhood
where my kids can
ride their bikes.
We're not worried
about them getting hit
by a car or abducted.
But to me, I just found
fulfillment in life.
Just being alive gave me
so much happiness and joy.
Waking up in the morning
alive, without pain,
and with all of my physical body
working, was like, this is--
I'm so thankful.
Thank you, God, for
another day, for my wife
beside me, for my little baby,
and now for my two girls later.
But at that time, it was like--
and that we have enough
money to get groceries and--
at that time, we were
just barely getting
by with our finances.
But I was just so--
I realized I was content.
So I think contentment
and fulfillment
are two sides of the same coin.
And I learned-- cancer taught
me gratitude and contentment,
two things I'd never
understood before.
And I realized, if
we never move from
this first little
two-bedroom house we live in,
I'm content with this.
I'm OK.
I'm just happy to be alive.
So everything else is
a bonus at this point.
I'm not dying.
I'm alive.
Great.
So I'm a little bit
of a unique case
because I had such a
dramatic karate chop, that--
cancer has a way of
making this dividing line
in your life between
the essential
and the non-essential.
And you realize right away--
maybe some cancer
patients don't.
For me, right away, I realized
this much was essential
and this much was not essential.
It was like, my wife my family,
my health, roof over my head,
food, what we call the
basic human necessities,
Maslow's hierarchy of needs--
my needs are met.
I've got the essentials.
Everything else
doesn't even matter.
And if I have some of it, great.
It'd be fun to have more money.
It'd be fun to be able to
go on a cruise or whatever.
But man, I've got so much to
be thankful for every day.
Again, everything was
so hyper-clear to me.
I just had hyperclarity
in that time in my life
that it just basically
rewired my brain.
It rewired my level of
contentment and gratitude.
And it dropped the bar
way down, way down.
And so now I'm 13 years out
and I'm still about the same.
There are days when
I can definitely
get grumpy and
irritated and annoyed
at things that don't matter.
And I have to catch
myself and be like,
why am I upset about this?
It doesn't matter.
It's fine.
It's irritating.
Let's forget about it.
And so I think--
I try to help people
understand this.
I try to remind people
of this, and especially
cancer patients, that--
I think they're easier
because they understand it
because they have that same
hyperclarity about what's
important and what's not.
But if you really take
stock in your life
and you really look
at what's around you
and what you really care
about and what you absolutely
have to have and what all
you don't have to have
and what you need to be
happy, it's very little.
And the happiest people in
the world are the poorest.
There's multiple studies they've
done on the happiest people
in the world.
And you Google it, it's
always the poorest cultures
that are so happy.
And you're like, how
can they be so happy?
They have nothing.
Because when you
have nothing, it
teaches you to be
grateful for everything.
And we can learn a lot
from people like that.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
It's been 13 years
since I was diagnosed.
I'm still cancer-free.
The original oncologist
that told me I was insane,
I've never seen him
again, never went back.
But I found an
integrative oncologist
who is an amazing man that had
come back out of retirement
to treat cancer patients
and was actually doing
a vitamin and C IV therapy
and some other integrative
or "alternative" nontoxic
therapies because he had spent
a lifetime watching
people suffer and die
with conventional treatment.
And he was in his 70s and he's
like, let's try something else.
Let's try some other things
that are nontoxic, maybe that
can boost the immune system.
And maybe we can help.
Maybe I can help people get
well with some new things.
It ended up costing
him his license,
but it didn't matter
because he was in his 70s.
It was fine.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
My name's Chris Wark.
I was diagnosed with
stage III colon cancer
when I was 26 years old.
And after surgery, I
refused chemotherapy.
And I did a very scary
thing, which was I
chose to try to get well, to
try to heal, with nutrition
and natural therapies
because the idea of poisoning
my way back to health
didn't make sense.
But this idea that I
could rebuild my body
if I changed my whole diet and
life, that maybe my body could
heal, that maybe the reason I
was sick was because of the way
I was living, maybe it
was partly my fault,
and I was OK with that--
and so the idea that if I
changed everything, maybe
I could get well.
And so I stepped out in faith.
I did something that was scary,
but made a little more sense
to me than the traditional
chemotherapy track.
And I did get well.
And my wife and I
started a family.
I have two girls that are
8 and 11 years old now.
And I'm 39.
And I've been eating
massive amounts
of fruits and vegetables every
day for the last 13 years.
And people still routinely
ask me if I'm in my 20s.
It's as if I almost
haven't aged in 13 years.
It's pretty crazy.
But that's the
power of my choices
not just to change my diet to
a plant-based diet with loads
of fruits and
vegetables, but also, I
changed the way I thought.
I changed my
attitude, my emotions.
I started to choose positivity.
I chose gratitude.
I stopped being bitter and
envy and jealous of people.
And I realized that I'm so
blessed to have what I have.
And so contentment and
gratitude became a big part
of my daily practice.
And all of those things
created health in my body.
And so I sit here
now, 13 years later,
in the best shape of my life,
in the best health of my life.
Dr. McCullough
told me last night
that I looked
extraordinarily healthy
That's what he said to me.
So here I am.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
One of the big things I did
was a radical diet change.
I took massive
action and converted
from the standard
Western diet, which
is meat and dairy three
times a day, processed food,
fast food, junk
food, tons of sugar,
salt, oils, just your
standard Western diet,
and I converted to
a raw vegan diet
after reading a book by a
guy who healed his cancer
with this raw vegan diet.
And so I'm like, wow,
this is interesting.
I want to try this.
And it made sense to me
or I least liked the idea
that maybe I was sick in part
because my body was deficient,
like I wasn't giving it
all the nutrition it really
needed to thrive.
And I read a book that
made a case for, we're
missing a lot of vital
nutrients from our diet
because we're eating
all this processed food.
And if you start eating tons
of fruits and vegetables,
you're putting all this
amazing stuff in your body
that it needs to really
function at optimal levels.
And there's powerful
anticancer compounds
in fruits and vegetables.
So I convert this
raw vegan diet.
And I was drinking
tons of carrot juice
because I'd read that carrot
juice is really good for cancer
because it has a lot of
vitamin A and beta carotene.
So I was taking 64 ounces
of carrot juice every day.
I'd make a big batch first
thing in the morning.
And then for lunch--
I'm a minimalist.
And so in the beginning, I got a
raw food cookbook and I'm like,
OK, I'll make some
recipes and stuff.
And then I quickly realized
that it was too much work,
like, oh, I got to
buy a dehydrator
and then make these dehydrated,
raw crackers or something.
I don't know.
It got really complicated.
And so I realized that if
I was going to do this,
I had to simplify
it down to something
that I could do
every single day.
It had to be doable
and sustainable.
It couldn't be like
you get on a kick
and then lose interest
because it's too much work.
So I came to this
very simple conclusion
that, all right, let me just
get every vegetable I can find
and just put them
in a giant bowl
and have a giant salad,
giant cancer-fighting salad.
So it wasn't just a
big bowl of lettuce,
which is what people think about
when they think about salad,
usually.
Yes, there were leafy grains
like spinach and kale,
but it was broccoli,
cauliflower, kale, cabbage,
onions, mushrooms, peppers,
sprouts, not only broccoli
sprouts, but also sprouted
garbanzo beans or mung beans
or lentils.
And then I would top it
with a little Bragg--
organic olive oil and apple
cider vinegar, fermented--
obviously, vinegar is fermented,
but also some sauerkraut
or kimchi on there.
And then I would add some spices
like garlic, turmeric, oregano,
and cayenne pepper.
And so I just made
this giant salad.
In fact, I had to go buy bigger
bowls because we didn't even
have bowls big enough
for this monster salad
that I just figured,
OK, well these
are all the best anticancer
vegetables, so I've "read".
And so I guess I just need to
eat a lot of these every single
day.
And so I just created this
very simple daily diet.
It was juicing
throughout the day--
I pretty much juiced
through breakfast--
and then giant salad
for lunch and dinner.
And it was so delicious.
I loved it so much that it
was just really easy to eat.
It was just so good.
And then as time went on and
I read and research more,
I started to find actual
nutritional science
published research on the
most potent anticancer foods.
And there's so much
science on this now.
And in 2004, I didn't
even know about any of it.
I was just reading
people's opinions
in books that were not
scientists, survivors
and healers and stuff.
And turns out the most
potent anticancer vegetables
are garlic, onions, leeks,
broccoli, cauliflower, kale,
cabbage.
Everything I was
eating had a variety
of anticancer compounds.
My juice had carrot juice,
but it also had ginger in it,
which ginger is a very
potent anticancer compound.
I was using these spices,
garlic, turmeric, oregano, and
cayenne pepper, which are
all potent anticancer spices.
So it was this
perfect synergistic--
I call it the giant
cancer-fighting salad
because there is no
way you can really
calculate how much
potency is in it with all
of these vegetables in
there and the spices.
And so that was my concoction.
And those two giant salads plus
juicing throughout the day--
plus, in the afternoons, I
would have a fruit smoothie.
I would get a fresh, young
coconut, cut it open,
pour the juice in the blender
and scoop the meat out and put
that in the blender,
blend it up,
make a "coconut
milk" or whatever,
and then throw a few cups of
frozen organic berries in there
and a banana.
So berries are the most
potent anticancer fruits.
And so I was doing that, too.
I didn't know it at the time.
But again, I'd
read a few things.
I was like, OK, I'm going
to make a berry smoothie.
And I'd read coconuts
were pretty good.
And so I went from eating
one to two servings of fruits
and vegetables per day just--
if you're counting
French fries and a tomato
slice on a hamburger.
Does that count as a vegetable?
It's technically a fruit.
Everyone knows that.
But you know what I'm saying.
I went from that to
between 15 and 20 servings
of fruits and vegetables every
single day, day in, day out.
And it was 100%.
It wasn't just like,
oh, I'll have a salad
and then tonight, I'll
have a cheeseburger.
It was day in, day out, every
day, every day, every day.
And then I did
some juice fasting.
So I would go for 3, 5,
7, 10 days on just juice,
just trying to detoxify
and cleanse my body
and just do something radical
and see what would happen.
And as it turns out, when you
eat 15 to 20 servings of fruits
and vegetables every day,
your body really likes it
And really amazing
things start happening.
You're saturating your body
with all kinds of vitamins,
minerals, enzymes, and thousands
of anticancer compounds,
phytonutrients, phytochemicals,
which means basically
plant nutrients, that you
don't find in meat and dairy
and Snickers bars.
And so there's a
synergistic effect.
When you're just putting
all this stuff in every day,
you get momentum.
And you get this healing
momentum and this nutrition
momentum, where you
just keep giving
your body this good stuff.
And it's like, oh,
wow, man, we've
got all these really
good raw materials.
We can really do
some stuff with this.
And in the process, I was
feeling tons of energy.
In the beginning, I had a
little bit of a detox reaction.
The first week, felt low
energy and didn't feel so good
and was detoxing
from food withdrawal,
from the meat and dairy
and sugar-addicted diet
that I was on.
But once that addiction
broke, then I just
had this amazing turnaround
in my energy levels.
And life was good.
I was just feeling great.
I drank so much carrot juice
I turned orange, orange skin,
orange hands.
I remember at a
doctor's appointment,
the nurse said, you look
like you might be jaundiced.
And I was like, no, no,
it's just the carrots.
I drink a lot of carrot juice.
And she said well, maybe
you're drinking too much.
I'm like, I'm all right.
I'm good.
Let me just keep
doing what I'm doing.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So my diet has
evolved over time.
The first 90 days of
my anticancer journey
were 100% raw.
And around that 90-day mark,
working with an oncologist,
he suggested that I add some
cooked food into the diet
and some animal protein.
And the reason he did
is because even though I
was feeling really
good, was underweight,
was really, really thin.
I'd lost weight from cancer.
I'd lost weight
from the surgery.
I'd done juice fasting,
lost more weight.
So I was really skinny.
And I had a really
high metabolism.
And so I was just not
gaining weight back.
And so he said, why don't
we add more cooked food?
Why don't you add some brown
rice and sweet potatoes
and quinoa with your dinner?
And why don't you try to have a
serving of clean animal protein
maybe once or twice a week,
like wild-caught salmon
or organic, grass-fed lamb
or something like that?
And the reason he
recommend lamb is
because lamb is one of the
only meats that doesn't
have fear hormones in it.
Because lambs, they don't
resist being slaughtered,
which is actually why Jesus
is called the Lamb of God,
because he didn't resist
going to the cross,
being slaughtered.
It just blew my mind when
my naturopath told me that.
I was like wow, man.
So at that point,
I thought, well--
I assumed I'd be a raw
vegan the rest of my life.
I was fully indoctrinated.
I was in the most elite club
of healthy eating possible.
And I was actually starting
to turn into a little bit
of a snob about it.
But at the same time,
I wanted to live.
And I trusted this man
that was helping me.
And so I was like, well-- and
I knew I was way underweight.
I looked in the mirror and
I didn't like what I saw.
So I was like, OK,
I just want to live.
If you think it's
OK, I'll try it.
So we added a little
more cooked food,
a little bit of animal protein.
And I was able to get back
up to a normal weight range
and maintain that
diet for years.
So that was the diet
that for many years
was my anticancer diet, giant
salads, juicing all day,
a little bit of cooked
food in my salad at night,
and occasional serving
of animal protein.
And now it's been 13 years.
And once I got past
the five-year mark,
I started experimenting
with different diets.
The paleo diet was
getting popular
and I was interested in it.
Experimented with
that a little bit.
Experimented with Weston
Price and the raw milk
and raw eggs, raw butter,
and the other side
of raw food eating,
except I never
got into the raw meat eating.
But I started investigating
a lot of different diets
and became obsessed
with healthy cultures
and healthy populations.
And I realized that there
are a lot of gurus promoting
healthy diets, but a lot
of their healthy diet ideas
were not grounded
in real people.
They were just
grounded in theory.
And so the deeper
I dug and the more
I started to read and research,
I realized, wait a minute.
We've got healthy, long-living
cultures around the world
already, established.
What are they doing?
How are they eating?
How are they living?
And then I found
this amazing book
called "The Blue Zones,"
which is all about that,
and another book by John
Robbins, "Healthy at 100."
And so those books were really
great because again, they--
"The Blue Zones" is a
National Geographic project.
And they travel the world
and they found these isolated
pockets where they had really
high percentages of people
living past 100.
And they studied their
diet and lifestyle habits.
And they realized, wow,
there's a lot of common threads
all over the world with
these people groups
even though they're on
different continents.
Their diet's 95% plant-based.
So they're not vegans.
They're not raw vegans.
But their diet is almost
exclusively plants.
They might eat meat a few times
a week, a few times a month,
but it's very low.
And they have really
good community support.
And they typically get a lot
of fresh air and sunshine
because they're poor and
they're walking everywhere
and they're working outside.
And when I say
community support,
they have good, really
strong social structure,
big, extended families, and
they spend a lot of time
together as a community.
And so then I started to read
the science and the studies
behind those books.
And it was like, OK,
I now understand.
These are the people
I want to emulate.
I don't want to
emulate the guru who
has some caveman theory
of our healthiest diet,
that we need to
eat like a caveman.
I want to emulate the
healthiest people on Earth
now, that are real,
that we can study,
that we don't have to
speculate anything about.
And so that brought
me full circle
from experimenting
with different things
and eating a lot more meat
than I had been eating
when I had cancer and things.
And I realized,
yeah, you know what?
My initial cancer diet
was right on the money.
But with my metabolism, I just
need a little more cooked food
versus raw.
So my diet now is
about 98% plant-based.
And I eat one raw meal a
day and two cooked meals.
And I basically eat the
same stuff every day.
I'm a minimalist.
Breakfast is a giant
bowl of oatmeal
with tons of fruit in it and
hemp seed, flaxseed, chia seed,
cinnamon, lots of good stuff.
Lunch is a huge smoothie, lots
of fruit, 4 cups of berries,
10 dates, handfuls of spinach
and kale, almonds, walnuts.
And then dinner is
something my wife makes.
So dinner, we mix it up.
So she'll make--
one example that we
have [INAUDIBLE]
on regular rotation
would be sweet potato,
black bean quesadillas.
So it'd be an organic
sprouted tortilla and then
sweet potatoes and black beans
and lentils and some avocado
and cilantro and a
little salsa in there.
And it's delicious.
It's just so good, my mouth is
watering just talking about it.
But yeah, she'll just make
a variety of cooked veggies
for dinner.
And once or twice a month, if
I have a craving for animal
protein, I'll have some.
But it's very
different than back
when I used to eat
meat every day.
Because I hear people
say, oh, I just
couldn't live without meat.
I have to have
meat with my meal.
And when you're in that state,
you have a protein addiction.
You have an animal
protein addiction.
Your body is adapted to eating
animal protein, this really
concentrated protein,
three times a day.
And so yeah, if you stop
doing it, in the short term,
you feel like crap.
You have withdrawal from it.
But once you break
that addiction,
if you have a craving for
it, it feels very different.
And it's not every day and it
may not even be every week.
For me, it's every
maybe few weeks,
I might feel like I
need a little bit.
And the cool thing is seeing
all these healthy cultures
and the way that eat, that's
basically the way they eat,
too.
So I feel good about it.
Yeah.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Well, spiritual mantra?
I'm a pretty minimal,
simple kind of guy.
And I believe truth is simple.
And so for me, I believe that
God created the Earth for us
and that everything we
need comes from the earth.
And it was that very
simple idea that
was the foundation of me
adopting this hardcore
diet of fruits and vegetables,
food from the earth.
It just made sense to me.
It was like, I think
truth is simple
and I'm going to do this.
But there was a lot
of fear in my journey.
And it required me to go
very deep in my faith.
It was a test of my faith.
Because faith is
believing in something
that you don't have
physical evidence of.
And for me, it was believing
that when I asked God for help
and I got an answer, that it
was from him, and that if it was
from him, that if I took this
very different path, that he
would see me through it.
And it was a daily struggle
to fight doubt and fear.
And you can be in fear and
in faith at the same time.
You can be also fearful,
but moving forward in faith.
But doubt is the enemy of faith.
You can't have both.
They cannot both exist.
So fighting doubt was a
big part of my daily--
because doubts creep in.
And I would just have to catch
myself and be like, I'm just
going to choose to believe.
I'm going to do this.
God, I trust you.
You're in control.
Please don't let me die.
I'm going to do
everything I can do.
I'm doing everything I can do.
But at the end of the
day, I know you're--
I'm choosing to believe
that you're in control.
I know in my heart, deep down,
you're in control of this.
And I'm trusting you.
Because there were many moments
where I just had this thought--
I'd be my car or
something and I'd
get a little bit
overwhelmed with fear.
And I'd just be like, it's
just you and me, Jesus.
I don't know what else to do.
I don't have anybody else.
And so it was just me and Jesus.
That was it.
It was all I had.
As much as my mom loves
me and supported me,
and of course my wife ended
up becoming a big support,
you're still very alone
in the cancer journey.
It's you and your thoughts and
your life and your decisions
and your future.
And so it pushed me
very deep into faith.
I was already a believer.
I was already a Christian.
But it was like, OK, I really
got to go deep, deep, and trust
that God is in control and
that if I put my faith in him,
that he won't let me down.
And he didn't.
And what I encourage
people to do--
if they don't believe
there's a God--
and I think when you have
cancer, you're much more open.
You're confronted
with death and so--
but if you don't believe or you
don't know or your not sure,
just reach out.
That's it.
You don't have to go
to church tomorrow.
Just reach out and
ask, are you there?
Reveal yourself.
I need help.
I'm-- just a sincere
prayer, like, OK,
you've got my attention.
Here I am.
Just speak to me.
Show me people in my life--
I don't know.
And when you do that, amazing
things happen, when you ask.
But you also have
to be willing--
you have to put your
little antenna up.
Because you can't just say--
God never really answers
prayer-- usually,
it's not just like, can I have
a pony, blip, like, oh, hey.
He uses people.
God works through people.
And so if you're
asking for help,
then you have to really
have your eyes open
and be looking for the answer
to come to you, and then
not just--
if something comes,
you can't just
be like, oh, it's
just a coincidence,
and then throw it out.
Because you just totally
hijacked maybe a huge blessing.
If that book had come to
me and I'd just been like,
I don't know, who knows what
my life would have been like?
Or if I had let the
doubt overtake my faith--
because people
were pushing doubt.
They were really feeding this
doubt, like, don't do this.
It's a mistake.
This doesn't work.
Got to do what the doctor says.
And if I had really let
the doubt take over,
then I'd probably be dead.
I wouldn't have my
beautiful girls.
Who knows what
would have happened?
But that's where the rubber
meets the road because--
there's a verse in James.
And it says faith
without works is dead.
And works means action.
And so you prove your
faith by your actions,
like I believe this, therefore
I'm doing something about it,
like, I believe this
chair will hold me up;
I'm willing to put
my weight on it.
People get confused
about what faith is.
It's not just
believing something.
It's believing something
so much that you're
willing to stake
your life on it.
You're willing to take
action and with the hope
that your action will produce
that thing that you have faith
for.
[MUSIC PLAYING]